---
layout: post
title:  "Xonsh the shell for XXIth century"
date:   2020-03-01 12:35:28 +0800
categories: [Linux]
tags: [shell, xonsh, bash, sh, csh, tcsh, linux, lazy]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
I am a happy user of xonsh shell, and let sh, csh, tcsh and bash behind...

Xonsh merges python and shell, with a terrific prompt!

<!--more-->
Discovering unix last century (hp-ux), i quickly enhanced my shell to tcsh.
that included tab-completion and nice scripts! such a marvel compared to sh or csh.

Then came my first encounter with bash in linux: not a good memory.
so i used to install tcsh on my box. except when i could not...

Alas, always fighting to install a shell, i finally embraced the default bash.
that lasted probably 20 years.

During those 20 years, things evolved (tab, color, hints, ...)
yet, the overall state did not change.

A new era of shell is coming. enter fish and xonsh (and more).

  * before: 90% of my use of prompt: cd, ls, bc, cat, launch...
  * after: same, but all in python (no more bc)
  
# xonsh

from [xon.sh](https://xon.sh/)
> xonsh is a python-powered, cross-platform, unix-gazing shell language and command prompt.
> the language is a superset of python 3.5+ with additional shell primitives that you are used to from bash and ipython.
> it works on all major systems including linux, mac osx, and windows.
> xonsh is meant for the daily use of experts and novices alike.

| **positive**                           | **slightly negative**                    |
|:--------------------------------------:|:----------------------------------------:|
| Python from the console                | *slightly slow to start (on my old box)* |
| fantastic play with prompt (see below) | syntax for looping on files              |


# Xonsh prompt for the pleasure

<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/assets/asciinema-player.css" />
<script src="/assets/asciinema-player.js"></script>

<asciinema-player src="/assets/xonsh-1min.cast" autoplay=1></asciinema-player>

# Xonsh - start/stop

<asciinema-player src="/assets/xonsh-xonshrc-prompt.cast" autoplay=1></asciinema-player>

# Details of .xonshrc
.xonshrc - Python code

{% highlight python %}
# Update PROMPT with current time (every second)
import datetime
$MULTILINE_PROMPT = ''
$PROMPT_REFRESH_INTERVAL = 1
$UPDATE_PROMPT_ON_KEYPRESS = True
# SEEMS Very slow when "{branch_color}{curr_branch: {}}" in PROMPT...

DEFAULT_PROMPT = '\n{GREEN}┌─[%s] {RED}[{user}@{hostname}]' \
               + ' {BOLD_CYAN}[{cwd}]{NO_COLOR}\n{GREEN}└─>{NO_COLOR} '
def update_prompt():
    return(DEFAULT_PROMPT % datetime.datetime.now().strftime("%H:%M:%S"))
$PROMPT = update_prompt

# After command execution:
# - Update RIGHT_PROMPT with command duration (and more)
# - emphasize on error if RC != 0
@events.on_postcommand
def display_command_status(cmd, rtn, out, ts):
    duration = ts[1] - ts[0]

    if duration > 60:
        $RIGHT_PROMPT = "\n🕙 %s " % str(datetime.timedelta(seconds=int(duration)))
    elif duration > 0.2:
        $RIGHT_PROMPT = "\n🕙 %.2fs " % duration
    else:
        $RIGHT_PROMPT = "\n<χ> "

    if rtn != 0:
        $RIGHT_PROMPT = $RIGHT_PROMPT + "\n⚠ " + str(rtn) + " ⚠"

        print("\n" + "⚠" * 25)
        print("⚠ " + str(rtn))
        if cmd[len(cmd)-1] == '\n':
            cmd_p = cmd[0:len(cmd)-1]
        else:
            cmd_p = cmd
        print("⚠ " + cmd_p)
        print("⚠" * 25 + "\n")

# Clean RIGHT_PROMPT when no command executed (Empty line, Enter/Enter)
$RIGHT_PROMPT = "χ "

@events.on_post_prompt
def display_post_prompt():
    $RIGHT_PROMPT = "χ"
{% endhighlight %}
